JOSE paper (#657)
COSIMA/cosima-recipes: paper/paper.md

Then comes the main part of any cookbook, its recipes. Here, by "recipes"
we mean self-contained notebooks showing how to perform concrete diagnostics
and analyses on ocean and sea-ice datasets. First come the "Easy Recipes" that
provide a good entry point after the tutorials; then the "Advanced Recipes"
that are more elaborate and advanced analysis examples, and last the "Regional Specialties"
contains recipes for regional model configurations [@barnes2024regionalmom6].
Together these sections present the documentation as a browsable collection of
lessons and recipes gathered into a single cookbook.

Pedagogy and instructional structure are central to the project. The idea is
that these recipes provide the starting point for more elaborate analyses.
"Cooking Tutorials" introduces generic skills such as loading model output,
working with labelled arrays, plotting, and interacting with shared data catalogues.
These tutorials lead into domain-focused recipes giving learners an incremental path
from first contact with the data ecosystem to adaptation of full workflows for
their own science questions.

Within this structure, the tutorials include examples of loading model output

> through intake-based catalogues [@intake] and incorporating Cartopy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
through Intake-based catalogues [@intake] and incorporating Cartopy
```

[@cartopy] for map-based visualisation. The recipe collection also includes a
Lagrangian particle-tracking workflow built with Parcels

> [@Delandmeter-vanSebille-2019], as well as analyses that use xgcm [@xgcm] to handle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[@Delandmeter-vanSebille-2019], as well as analyses that use xarray [@hoyer2017xarray] and Dask [@dask] to process very large multi-dimensional datasets in parallel, xgcm [@xgcm] to handle
```

a lightweight pedagogical cue about expected complexity and scope, with
"regional specialties" specifically covering recipes for regional model configurations
[@barnes2024regionalmom6].

The intended mode of use is also explicit. The repository is designed around
Jupyter-based analysis on the Australian National Computational Infrastructure,
with guidance on running notebooks through ARE/JupyterLab sessions and on
accessing shared data holdings. This makes the Cookbook more than a static
collection of examples: it is operational documentation for a real analysis
environment. At the same time, the notebooks demonstrate broadly transferable
patterns for working with labelled geophysical data, so individual lessons can
be reused or adapted outside that environment.

The project also supports community authorship. Contributors are encouraged to
submit new notebooks through pull requests, document their methods clearly, and
generalise workflows so that they remain useful to others. In that sense, the
Cookbook functions both as a learning module for end users and as a framework
for teaching reproducible scientific communication through notebook design and
peer review.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The easy access to data and analysis provided by the COSIMA Cookbook has enabled rapid community adoption of the ACCESS ocean and sea-ice model configurations, facilitating [well over 100 peer-reviewed papers](https://scholar.google.com/citations?hl=en&user=inVqu_4AAAAJ) to date, and many PhD projects.
```

Reviewer: can we provide at last a lower bound on the number of PhD projects that made use of the cookbook?

Author: Very very very good point about the 100+ papers.

Author: Not sure about the lower bound. I'm leaving the comment unresolved in case somebody has something to add.

Reviewer: I think "scores of PhD projects" might be accurate

Reviewer: or at least "dozens"

Reviewer 2: I agree with @aekiss comment. I have many times suggested people unrelated to COSIMA to look at the examples to learn how to do some of the analysis (I'm sure many other people have done the same!), thus I think we should also expand this point by saying something on the lines of:

```suggestion
The easy access to data and analysis provided by the COSIMA Cookbook showcases best practices to the broader oceanographic community and enabled rapid community adoption of the ACCESS ocean and sea-ice model configurations internationally, facilitating [well over 100 peer-reviewed papers](https://scholar.google.com/citations?hl=en&user=inVqu_4AAAAJ) to date, and scores of PhD projects.
```

Author: Happy with "scores of PhD projects"!
(and also I just learned a new expression)

Reviewer 3: Heads up: this change does duplicate the line above -- maybe delete that? Happy to be included on the paper and contribute as needed!

Reviewer 2: Yes, I noticed that too

Reviewer 4: Is "scores" accurate? The literal (though somewhat archaic) meaning is 20, hence the biblical quote ["The days of our years are threescore years and ten"](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Psalm%2090%3A10&version=KJV).

Without some sort of rough data to back it up, that feels like overreach to me.

Author: Yes, but in recent years scores is used more freely than meaning 20. 

Let’s count:

Christina
Hannah
Julia
Josue
Felippe
Jan Jaap
Ashley
Polina (almost completed)
Hangyu (almost completed)
Dhruv
Noah
Denisse
Ruth (?)
Ellie
Claire (almost completed)
Maurice?

That’s 16 and I’m definitely missing people? Is that data enough? It’s more than a dozen already.

Reviewer 5: I've just done a count based on PhD-led papers published since 2020 that cite/use the cosima models (here I'm assuming if they used the model/output then they also used the recipes) and I get 21 completed  PhDs and a further 8 current PhDs. And there's probably more currently using it that haven't published yet - so quite a lot :)

Reviewer 4: I still have some reservations about "scores", but I don't expect to have the deciding vote on this. I'm happy to go with "dozens" or to be overruled.

Author: Let’s write “over 20”?

‘Dozens’ reminds me of buying eggs.

Reviewer 4: Fair enough 🪺 
That works for me.

Reviewer: If we only have 30-ish, "scores" is misleading (I'd understand that to be 40+) , so I'd go for "dozens" or "tens" or "over 25"

Author: rephrased to "and more than 20 PhD projects to completion with several
other underway."

Reviewer 6: I'm not convinced that "with several other underway" is adding much to the sentence. Feels more powerful as the more succinct "and more than 20 PhD projects to completion" or "and more than 25 PhD projects"

If you do keep the "several other underway" other needs an 's' :)

Author: I'll rephrase to "and more than 20 PhD projects to completion to date."

# Author order

The first two authors contributed equally; authors from the third position
onward are listed alphabetically by surname.

# Acknowledgements

We are grateful to the COSIMA community for developing and maintaining the model
output, workflows, and pedagogical practices and also for the great community
spirit that defines COSIMA. We also acknowledge the National Computational Infrastructure,
which is supported by the Commonwealth government of Australia, and the ACCESS National
Research Infrastructure (ACCESS-NRI) ecosystem that make the operational use of these notebooks

> possible. ACCESS-NRI's model ACCESS-OM2 is enabled by the Australian Government's National

Reviewer: ```suggestion
possible. ACCESS-NRI's ACCESS-OM2 and ACCESS-OM3 models are enabled by the Australian Government's National
```

Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy (a.k.a. NCRIS).
We acknowledge funding from the Australian Research Council under the Center of
Excellence for the Weather of the 21st Century CE230100012, the Linkage Infrastructure,
Equipment and Facilities LP160100073 and LP200100406, and the Discovery
Project DP240101274.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This work was supported by computational resources provided by the Australian Government through the National Computational Infrastructure (NCI) under the National Computational Merit Allocation Scheme and ANU Merit Allocation Scheme.
```

Author: Done via https://github.com/COSIMA/cosima-recipes/pull/657/commits/8b7eb84f33fe0a34160f8eea6400f71d553af436

    orcid: 0000-0002-6097-5729
    affiliation: 14
  - name: Anupiya Ellepola
    orcid: 0009-0002-8898-0068
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Matthew England
    orcid: 0000-0001-9696-2930
    affiliation: 11
  - name: Denisse Fierro-Arcos
    orcid: 0000-0002-5039-6272
    affiliation: 14
  - name: Angus Gibson
    orcid: 0000-0001-7577-3604
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Aidan Heerdegen
    orcid: 0000-0002-4481-4896
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Andy McC. Hogg
    orcid: 0000-0001-5898-7635
    affiliation: "3, 4"
  - name: Ryan M. Holmes
    orcid: 0000-0002-6799-9109
    affiliation: 5
  - name: Wilma Huneke
    orcid: 0000-0001-8624-365X
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Jemma Jeffree
    orcid: 0000-0001-7190-7329
    affiliation: "2, 4"
  - name: Andrew E. Kiss
    orcid: 0000-0001-8960-9557
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Minghang Li
    orcid: 0000-0002-6167-9999
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Josué Martínez-Moreno
    orcid: 0000-0002-8348-1588
    affiliation: 10
  - name: Jan Jaap Meijer
    orcid: 0000-0001-8667-488X
    affiliation: 14
  - name: Thomas Moore
    orcid: 0000-0003-3930-1946
    affiliation: 7
  - name: Ruth Moorman
    orcid: 0000-0001-5054-1559
    affiliation: 6

>   - name: Adele Morrison

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  - name: Adele K. Morrison
```

    index: 3
  - name: Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for the Weather of the 21st Century, Australia
    index: 4
  - name: Bureau of Meteorology, Australia
    index: 5
  - name: California Institute of Technology, USA
    index: 6
  - name: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Australia
    index: 7
  - name: Monash University, Australia
    index: 8
  - name: Princeton University, USA
    index: 9
  - name: British Antarctic Survey, UK
    index: 10
  - name: University of New South Wales Sydney, Australia
    index: 11
  - name: University of Melbourne, Australia
    index: 12
  - name: University of Southampton, UK
    index: 13
  - name: University of Tasmania, Australia
    index: 14
date: 26 May 2026
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

The COSIMA Cookbook is an open computational learning module for analysing
ocean and sea-ice model output in Jupyter notebooks. It has been developed by
the Consortium for Ocean-Sea Ice Modelling in Australia (COSIMA; https://cosima.org.au)
as a community resource for researchers, students, and practitioners working
with large gridded datasets, especially output from the ACCESS ocean-sea ice

> model configuration [@kiss2020accessom2]. The repository combines introductory

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
model configurations [e.g. @kiss2020accessom2]. The repository combines introductory
```

Because some recipes work for OM3 not OM2, so we should generalise this.

tutorials with worked analysis examples, all exposed through a browsable Sphinx
documentation site (\autoref{fig:website}) and backed by a citable archived
release [@cosimaCookbook].

![The COSIMA Cookbook documentation website, showing the browsable Sphinx-based
landing page used to navigate tutorials and recipes. The live site is available

> at https://cosima-recipes.readthedocs.io. \label{fig:website}](website.png)

Reviewer 7: We are about to deprecate the 'Appetisers' naming, so what about replacing this with a figure showing the new name (Cooking Tutorials)?

Reviewer: If we change the directory names (again) it will (again) break every link to these notebooks, including an unknowable number from elsewhere on the internet.

Author: @aekiss, add your voice in #612

Author: the links in the notebooks in the repository we will update as part of resolving #612; for the rest of the internet we don't have control

Reviewer: which is exactly why we shouldn't change them without good reason

Reviewer 8: Just flagging that as of now, Figure 1 and lines 32-41 are inconsistent in naming convention

Author: We need an updated figure after #658

Author: done via 817433adb3bb831ed4cfd2360626d4667542d296

Following the "Cookbook" concept, the website sections are deliberately named

> using a gastronomy theme. "Cooking Lessons 101" refers to tutorials that teach

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
using a gastronomy theme. "Cooking Tutorials" refers to tutorials that teach
```

generic, transferable techniques for handling ocean--sea ice model output; next

> come the "Appetisers" that are easier recipes that provide a good entry point

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
come the "Easy Recipes" that are easier recipes that provide a good entry point
```

> after the tutorials; "Mains" are more elaborate and advanced analysis examples,

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
after the tutorials; "Advanced Recipes" are more elaborate and advanced analysis examples,
```

> and "Local Dishes" collect recipes for regional model configurations [@barnes2024regionalmom6].

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
and "Regional Specialties" collect recipes for regional model configurations [@barnes2024regionalmom6].
```

> and "Regional Specialties" collect recipes for regional model configurations [@barnes2024regionalmom6].

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
and "Regional Specialties" contains recipes for regional model configurations [@barnes2024regionalmom6].
```

Together these sections present the documentation as a browsable collection of

> lessons and recipes gathered into a single cookbook.

Reviewer 5: I think it's a little confusing to mention "recipes" here when they're first defined on line 210 below. Could we say say analysis notebooks instead, or move that recipe definition earlier?

Author: We can define here! See https://github.com/COSIMA/cosima-recipes/pull/657/commits/fbc35d3a62d17d1b1155657f4dc5d45aa2137e46

> collect recipes for regional model configurations [@barnes2024regionalmom6].

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
contain recipes for regional model configurations [@barnes2024regionalmom6].
```

Author: [642ba50](https://github.com/COSIMA/cosima-recipes/pull/657/commits/642ba506b44be0c85a75e1aa954ee5bdef275119)

Pedagogy and instructional structure are central to the project. The idea is
that these recipes provide the starting point for more elaborate analyses.
"Cooking Lessons 101" introduces generic skills such as loading model output,
working with labelled arrays, plotting, and interacting with shared data catalogues.
These tutorials lead into domain-focused "recipes": self-contained notebooks showing how to
perform concrete diagnostics and analyses on ocean and sea-ice datasets. The
current repository contains dozens of notebooks grouped into introductory,
advanced, and region-specific collections, giving learners an incremental path
from first contact with the data ecosystem to adaptation of full workflows for
their own science questions.

Within this structure, the tutorials include examples of loading model output
through intake-based catalogues [@intake] and incorporating Cartopy
[@cartopy] for map-based visualisation. The recipe collection also includes a
Lagrangian particle-tracking workflow built with Parcels

> [@lange2017parcels], as well as analyses that use xgcm [@xgcm] to handle

Reviewer 5: I think this is the most relevent Parcels reference: "_Delandmeter, P. and van Sebille, E.: The Parcels v2.0 Lagrangian framework: new field interpolation schemes, Geosci. Model Dev., 12, 3571–3584, https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-12-3571-2019, 2019_"

Author: thanks! updated by https://github.com/COSIMA/cosima-recipes/pull/657/commits/1e800bb0a0d27864f526587c5db8c4421dca81c2

be reused or adapted outside that environment.

The project also supports community authorship. Contributors are encouraged to
submit new notebooks through pull requests, document their methods clearly, and
generalise workflows so that they remain useful to others. In that sense, the
Cookbook functions both as a learning module for end users and as a framework
for teaching reproducible scientific communication through notebook design and
peer review.
The easy access to data and analysis provided by the COSIMA Cookbook has enabled rapid community adoption of the ACCESS ocean and sea-ice model configurations, facilitating, to this day, [well over 100 peer-reviewed papers](https://scholar.google.com/citations?hl=en&user=inVqu_4AAAAJ) and many PhD projects.
The easy access to data and analysis provided by the COSIMA Cookbook showcases best practices to the broader oceanographic community and enabled rapid community adoption of the ACCESS ocean and sea-ice model configurations internationally, facilitating [well over 100 peer-reviewed papers](https://scholar.google.com/citations?hl=en&user=inVqu_4AAAAJ) to date, and scores of PhD projects.

> # Author order

Author: ```suggestion

# Author order
```

a lightweight pedagogical cue about expected complexity and scope, with
"regional specialties" specifically covering recipes for regional model configurations
[@barnes2024regionalmom6].

The intended mode of use is also explicit. The repository is designed around
Jupyter-based analysis on the Australian National Computational Infrastructure,
with guidance on running notebooks through ARE/JupyterLab sessions and on
accessing shared data holdings. This makes the Cookbook more than a static
collection of examples: it is operational documentation for a real analysis
environment. At the same time, the notebooks demonstrate broadly transferable
patterns for working with labelled geophysical data, so individual lessons can
be reused or adapted outside that environment.

The project also supports community authorship. Contributors are encouraged to
submit new notebooks through pull requests, document their methods clearly, and
generalise workflows so that they remain useful to others. In that sense, the
Cookbook functions both as a learning module for end users and as a framework
for teaching reproducible scientific communication through notebook design and
peer review.

> The easy access to data and analysis provided by the COSIMA Cookbook has enabled rapid community adoption of the ACCESS ocean and sea-ice model configurations, facilitating, to this day, [well over 100 peer-reviewed papers](https://scholar.google.com/citations?hl=en&user=inVqu_4AAAAJ) and many PhD projects.

Reviewer 2: This line should be deleted to avoid repetition. 
```suggestion
```

  - name: Australian National University, Australia
    index: 2
  - name: "Australian National University, Australia's Climate Simulator (ACCESS-NRI), Australia"
    index: 3
  - name: Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for the Weather of the 21st Century, Australia
    index: 4
  - name: Bureau of Meteorology, Australia
    index: 5
  - name: California Institute of Technology, USA
    index: 6
  - name: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Australia
    index: 7
  - name: GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, Germany
    index: 8
  - name: IFREMER - French Institute for Ocean Science, France
    index: 9
  - name: Monash University, Australia
    index: 10
  - name: Princeton University, USA
    index: 11
  - name: British Antarctic Survey, UK
    index: 12
  - name: University of Melbourne, Australia
    index: 13
  - name: University of New South Wales Sydney, Australia
    index: 14
  - name: University of Southampton, UK
    index: 15
  - name: University of Tasmania, Australia
    index: 16
date: 26 May 2026
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

The COSIMA Cookbook is an open computational learning module for analysing

> ocean and sea-ice model output in Jupyter notebooks. It has been developed by

Reviewer 9: Does _Jupyter notebooks_ need a link / introduction ?

Author: Cite `@kluyver2016jupyter` here as well?

the Consortium for Ocean--Sea Ice Modelling in Australia (COSIMA; <https://cosima.org.au>)
as a community resource for researchers, students, and practitioners working
with large gridded datasets, especially output from the ACCESS ocean--sea ice

> model configurations [e.g. @kiss2020accessom2]. The repository combines introductory

Reviewer 9: _repository_ hasn't been introduced yet (it's called a module above)

Author: introduced now

> tutorials with worked analysis examples, all exposed through a browsable Sphinx

Reviewer 9: does _Sphinx_ mean anything to the typical reader here

Author: Good point, I'll add a small explainer

documentation site (\autoref{fig:website}) and backed by a citable archived
release [@cosimaCookbook].

![The COSIMA Cookbook documentation website, showing the browsable Sphinx-based
landing page used to navigate tutorials and recipes. The live site is available
at https://cosima-recipes.readthedocs.io. \label{fig:website}](website.png)

> Following the "Cookbook" concept, the website sections are deliberately named

Reviewer 9: the cookbook concept is introduced below, so the wording is maybe a bit out of order here

Reviewer 6: I agree. I actually think this whole section might flow better if the paragraph starting with "The Cookbook grew from a practical need" was bumped up to before this one.

The start of this paragraph is pretty jarring, and I think it'd benefit from some kind of "why" coming earlier

Reviewer 6: I also think this paragraph might go better if it went:

> Following the "Cookbook" concept, the website sections are named using a gastronomy theme. We start with tutorials that teach generic, transferable techniques for handling ocean—sea ice model output, which we call "Cooking Tutorials". We then follow this with self-contained notebooks showing how to perform concrete diagnostics and analyses on ocean and sea-ice datasets. These notebooks are the "recipes" that make up the core of the cookbook, and consist of both "Easy Recipes" that provide a good entry point after the tutorials and the "Advanced Recipes" that are more elaborate and demonstrate advanced analysis techniques. Lastly, the Cookbook also contains recipes for working with [should this be setting up?] regional model configurations [@barnes2024regionalmom6], that we term "Regional Specialities." Together, these sections present the documentation as a browsable collection of lessons and recipes gathered into a single cookbook.

I've tried to keep your structure as much as possible in the rewrite, apart from the one major change of flipping to put the tutorial/teaching thing that I think is the more familiar concept first, and the cooking name after. Otherwise, I found the whole paragraph read a bit forced, and like it might have been prioritising the cooking over the pedagogy, which I don't think is what we've done.

Reviewer 10: I agree with the comments here. As a first pass, I suggest rewording the first sentence so as not to imply that that the concept of a "Cookbook" has been mentioned before this paragraph. One rewording option is:

```suggestion
The COSIMA Cookbook is deliberately organized
```

Reviewer 11: > The start of this paragraph is pretty jarring, and I think it'd benefit from some kind of "why" coming earlier

I had this same thought independently and came here to make a comment but it's already been done. :)

>  I actually think this whole section might flow better if the paragraph starting with "The Cookbook grew from a practical need" was bumped up to before this one.

I also agree with this suggestion or a paragraph of that nature.

using a gastronomy theme. "Cooking Tutorials" refers to tutorials that teach
generic, transferable techniques for handling ocean--sea ice model output.
Then comes the main part of any cookbook -- its recipes. Here, by "recipes"
we mean self-contained notebooks showing how to perform concrete diagnostics
and analyses on ocean and sea-ice datasets. First come the "Easy Recipes" that
provide a good entry point after the tutorials; then the "Advanced Recipes"
that are more elaborate and demonstrate advanced analysis techniques, and lastly the "Regional Specialties"
contains recipes for regional model configurations [@barnes2024regionalmom6].
Together these sections present the documentation as a browsable collection of
lessons and recipes gathered into a single cookbook.

Pedagogy and instructional structure are central to the project. The idea is

> that these recipes provide the starting point for more elaborate analyses.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Pedagogy and instructional structure are central to the project. The recipes provide the starting point for more elaborate analyses.
```

"Cooking Tutorials" introduces generic skills such as loading model output,
working with labelled arrays, plotting, and interacting with shared data catalogues.
These tutorials lead into domain-focused recipes giving learners an incremental path
from first contact with the data ecosystem to adaptation of full workflows for
their own science questions.

Within this structure, the tutorials include examples of loading model output
through Intake-based catalogues [@intake] and incorporating Cartopy
[@cartopy] for map-based visualisation. The recipe collection also includes a
Lagrangian particle-tracking workflow built with Parcels
[@Delandmeter-vanSebille-2019], as well as analyses that use xarray [@hoyer2017xarray]
and Dask [@rocklin2015dask; @dask] to process very large multi-dimensional datasets
in parallel, xgcm [@xgcm] to handle variables defined on staggered finite-volume grids,

> and xESMF [@xesmf] for regridding model output.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Within this structure, the tutorials leverage and demonstrate open source tools for scientific analysis of large data. This includes examples of loading model output
through Intake-based catalogues [@intake], using xarray [@hoyer2017xarray] 
and Dask [@rocklin2015dask; @dask] to process very large multi-dimensional datasets
in parallel. The recipe collection includes a
Lagrangian particle-tracking workflow built with Parcels
[@Delandmeter-vanSebille-2019], as well as analyses that use xgcm [@xgcm] to handle variables defined on staggered finite-volume grids, and xESMF [@xesmf] for regridding model output.
Figures are generated using matplotlib[@hunter...] and incorporating Cartopy
[@cartopy] for map-based visualisation.
```

I tried to order infrascture first, science second, plotting third

If we include matplotlib, the citation is here:
https://matplotlib.org/stable/project/citing.html

The Cookbook grew from a practical need inside the COSIMA community: the tools
used to analyse modern ocean model output are powerful, but the gap between

> package-level documentation and a reproducible end-to-end workflow remains

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
package-level documentation and reproducible end-to-end workflows remains
```

[@kluyver2016jupyter], but also how to navigate high-dimensional model output,
shared high-performance computing environments, and domain-specific analysis
conventions. The Cookbook addresses this gap by packaging reusable workflows in
the same medium in which users actually work.

# Statement of Need

Ocean and climate model analysis has a steep entry cost. New users must learn
how to find datasets, load them efficiently, interpret metadata, operate on
multi-dimensional arrays, and produce scientifically meaningful diagnostics.
General-purpose libraries such as xarray [@hoyer2017xarray] provide the
foundations for these tasks, but they do not by themselves show a learner how
to translate a research question into a robust analysis workflow for a specific
model and computing environment.

That gap is not only pedagogical; it directly affects how quickly model output
can be turned into science. For a beginner, becoming productive with a model
often requires substantial time just to understand the structure of the output,
the relevant conventions, and the computational environment in which analysis is
expected to run. There is also substantial scientific labour embedded in many

> common diagnostics. Some calculations, for example computing cross-contour transports,

Reviewer 9: is there a ref for the _for example_ ? Otherwise it only means something to an oceanographer ?

Reviewer 12: I would also add that it is a learning tool for those new to physical oceanography, as it explains/outlines how to plot commonly used quantities, and can be independent of model/environment. This is implied from L95 to the end of section but not explicitly stated?
e.g. 
https://github.com/COSIMA/cosima-recipes/blob/8a0205ec0c85d2d08fe94fb3acd901b18f392c37/Recipes/Appetisers-Easy/Overturning_Circulation.ipynb

Author: rephrased this to address both comments; see 74ae22b

communities maintain model output on shared infrastructure and face the same
challenge: turning expert tacit knowledge into examples that newcomers can
adapt. The Cookbook offers a model for how a scientific collaboration can
capture that knowledge in version-controlled notebooks, publish it as a living
resource, and continuously improve it through community contribution.

# Educational Design and Experience of Use

The learning experience is organised as a progression. The documentation points
new users first to introductory lessons, including material on loading,
slicing, and visualising model output. Learners then move to more advanced
tutorials and finally to recipe notebooks that address concrete scientific
questions. The categories of "easy" and "advanced" recipes provide
a lightweight pedagogical cue about expected complexity and scope, with
"regional specialties" specifically covering recipes for regional model configurations
[@barnes2024regionalmom6].

The intended mode of use is also explicit. The repository is designed around
Jupyter-based analysis on the Australian National Computational Infrastructure,

> with guidance on running notebooks through ARE/JupyterLab sessions and on

Reviewer 9: I dont think ARE is introduced anywhere

Reviewer 10: I had the same thought when reading through. I suggest removing "ARE" entirely - it's something very specific to NCI, and I think it would be a distraction from the main point of the paper to take space describing what ARE is.
```suggestion
and include guidance on running notebooks through JupyterLab sessions and on
```

for teaching reproducible scientific communication through notebook design and
peer review. The easy access to data and analysis provided by the COSIMA Cookbook
showcases best practices to the broader oceanographic community and has enabled rapid
community adoption of the ACCESS ocean and sea-ice model configurations internationally,
facilitating to date well over [100 peer-reviewed papers](https://scholar.google.com/citations?hl=en&user=inVqu_4AAAAJ) and more than 20 PhD projects to completion with several
other underway.

# Author Order

The first two authors contributed equally; authors from the third position
onward are listed alphabetically by surname.

# Acknowledgements

This work was supported by computational resources provided by the Australian Government through the National Computational Infrastructure (NCI) under the National Computational Merit
Allocation Scheme and the Australian National University Allocation Scheme. We thank the
vibrant communities of the Consortium for Ocean–Sea Ice Modelling in Australia (COSIMA;
[cosima.org.au](https://cosima.org.au)) and the Australian Community Climate and Earth System

> Simulator National Research Infrastructure (ACCESS-NRI; [access-nri.org.au](https://access-nri.org.au))

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
[cosima.org.au](https://cosima.org.au)) and Australia’s climate simulator (ACCESS-NRI; [access-nri.org.au](https://access-nri.org.au))
```

I believe this is the preferred name:

https://www.access-nri.org.au/resources/acknowledging-us/

---

> title: "COSIMA Cookbook: a community resource for ocean and sea-ice modelling"

Reviewer 11: Wondering if having the word "analysis" in the title would help the reader know what this is all about?

e.g. 
> COSIMA Cookbook: a community resource for analysis of ocean and sea-ice models

H'm, now too clunky?

Author: "analysis" was in, but after some other remarks it went out (some recipes don't do analysis so that was the argumentation + the simplicity)

but I'll think about it again! Leaving this unresolved for now.

Reviewer 11: Lol, you have too many cooks! (pun intended)

H'm on balance though isn't it all about analysis? My vibe from the rest of the paper is that it is.

Reviewer 6: How do we feel about "COSIMA Cookbook: a community resource for doing/enabling science with ocean and sea-ice models"? A bit clunky, and if anyone can rephrase better please go for it, but you get the analysis idea in there while still including ROM setup scripts

Agree with Chris that as currently phrased it could be read as exclusively model setup and running

Author: how about

> "COSIMA Cookbook: a community-driven resource for ocean and sea-ice modelling science"

?

> title: "COSIMA Cookbook: a computational learning module for analysing ocean and sea-ice model output"

Reviewer 4: I don't really understand what "computational learning module" is supposed to mean. 

Also, the regional recipe helps setup a regional simulation, not analyse the output.

How about "COSIMA Cookbook: a community resource for ocean and sea-ice modelling"?

Author: Hm... I think analysing is 99% of what the Cookbook does. Because one recipe doesn't do it perhaps it's a bit too much to generalise the title?

But on the other hand your title suggestion is shorter and indeed nicer!

We somehow want to stress that this is not just a research tool but also has educational value (as it does have indeed). But perhaps the title is not the place to do it.

tags:
  - Jupyter
  - oceanography
  - sea ice
  - computational learning
  - reproducible workflows
  - Python
authors:
  - name: Navid C. Constantinou
    orcid: 0000-0002-8149-4094
    equal-contrib: true
    affiliation: "4, 13"
  - name: Julia Neme
    orcid: 0000-0002-3573-996X
    equal-contrib: true
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Wilton Aguiar
    orcid: 0000-0003-2453-9791
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Matthis Auger
    orcid: 0000-0001-6228-5732

>     affiliation: 16

Reviewer 13: Now in "University of Brest, France"

    orcid: 0000-0002-8967-2211
    affiliation: 15
  - name: Micael Oliveira
    orcid: 0000-0003-1364-0907
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Ellie Q. Y. Ong
    orcid: 0000-0002-0392-7915
    affiliation: "4, 10"
  - name: Max Proft
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Madelaine G. Rosevear
    orcid: 0000-0003-4254-843X
    affiliation: "4, 16"
  - name: Christina Schmidt
    orcid: 0000-0002-7672-5054
    affiliation: 12
  - name: Taimoor Sohail
    orcid: 0000-0002-4162-3269
    affiliation: 13
  - name: Paul Spence
    orcid: 0000-0001-5156-2204
    affiliation: "4, 16"
  - name: Dougal T. Squire
    orcid: 0000-0003-3271-6874
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Anton Steketee
    orcid: 0009-0002-9081-4106
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Charles Turner
    orcid: 0000-0002-3262-4972
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Felipe Vilela da Silva
    orcid: 0000-0003-1967-880X
    affiliation: 9
  - name: Marc White
    orcid: 0000-0003-3882-418X
    affiliation: "2, 3"
  - name: Luwei Yang
    orcid: 0000-0001-8570-7424
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Claire Yung
    orcid: 0000-0002-0052-7668
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Jan Zika
    orcid: 0000-0003-3462-3559
    affiliation: 14
affiliations:

>   - name: 2i2c, USA

Reviewer 14: ```suggestion
  - name: Earthdata Associates, Canada
```

I am no longer with 2i2c.

    index: 1
  - name: Australian National University, Australia
    index: 2

>   - name: "Australian National University, Australia's Climate Simulator (ACCESS-NRI), Australia"

Reviewer 11: Please [change to](https://anu365.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/sites/ACCESS-NRI/_layouts/15/Doc.aspx?sourcedoc=%7B0E4C9FDA-F645-4B7B-9162-6B8722AFD1D0%7D&file=Official%20affiliation%20for%20publications.docx&action=default&mobileredirect=true) ("closed link for our official guidance")

```suggestion
  - name: "Australia's Climate Simulator (ACCESS-NRI), Australian National University, Canberra, Australia"
```

Author: you mean change the order of affiliations?
And I presume your suggestion is for all ACCESS-NRI people right?

Reviewer 11: Yeah I think so. Our comms team have rather specific guidance.

Yes.

Reviewer 11: (@chanrahan has confirmed)

Author: Perhaps it'll be a good mental exercise for them if we keep it as is? :D

(kidding, I'll change it)

    index: 3
  - name: Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for the Weather of the 21st Century, Australia
    index: 4
  - name: Bureau of Meteorology, Australia
    index: 5
  - name: California Institute of Technology, USA
    index: 6
  - name: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Australia
    index: 7
  - name: GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, Germany
    index: 8
  - name: Monash University, Australia
    index: 9
  - name: Princeton University, USA
    index: 10
  - name: British Antarctic Survey, UK
    index: 11
  - name: University of Melbourne, Australia
    index: 12
  - name: University of New South Wales Sydney, Australia
    index: 13
  - name: University of Southampton, UK
    index: 14
  - name: University of Tasmania, Australia
    index: 15
date: 26 May 2026
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

The COSIMA Cookbook is an open computational learning module for analysing

> ocean and sea-ice model output in Jupyter notebooks. It has been developed by

Reviewer 4: Same comment as above, "open computational learning module" doesn't mean anything to me, and not all of the recipes are about analysing output.

Author: 1/ 99% of recipes are for analysing output, but we can be more precise and say "for analysing
ocean and sea-ice model output and for setting up ocean--sea ice model configurations"?

2/ We want to promote the educational aspect of the Cookbook. How should we/how would you phrase it? "Open computational learning module" wasn't meant to have a particular technical meaning but rather you  should interpret it via regular English. "Open" because it's available to all. "Computational" because it's focused on modelling, "learning" promoting its educational component. But let's rephrase this sentence creates confusion. At least now you know the rationale behind it.

Author: how about:

> The COSIMA Cookbook is an open educational resource for analysing ocean and sea-ice model output in Jupyter notebooks [@kluyver2016jupyter] and more.

The COSIMA Cookbook is an open computational learning module for analysing
ocean and sea-ice model output in Jupyter notebooks
[@kluyver2016jupyter]. It has been developed by
the Consortium for Ocean--Sea Ice Modelling in Australia (COSIMA; <https://cosima.org.au>)
as a community resource for researchers, students, and practitioners working
with large gridded datasets, especially output from the ACCESS ocean--sea ice
model configurations [e.g. @kiss2020accessom2]. The repository combines introductory

> tutorials with worked analysis examples, all exposed through a browsable

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
tutorials with worked analysis examples (Python Jupyter notebooks), all exposed through a browsable
```

these were introduced above so I think it helps to make the link here

documentation site built with Sphinx, a documentation generator for Python

> projects [@sphinx] (\autoref{fig:website}) and backed by a citable archived

Reviewer 11: Wasn't quite sure what was "backed" here. I think it's basically everything right? Could be re-phrased to be explicit about what is covered by the citation/_inside_ the release?

Author: I rephrased this

release [@cosimaCookbook].

![The COSIMA Cookbook documentation website, showing the browsable Sphinx-based

> landing page used to navigate tutorials and recipes. The live site is available

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
landing page used to navigate tutorials and recipes. The latest site is available
```

Author: Good point; I rephrased this.

at https://cosima-recipes.readthedocs.io. \label{fig:website}](website.png)

Following the "Cookbook" concept, the website sections are deliberately named

> using a gastronomy theme. "Cooking Tutorials" refers to tutorials that teach

Reviewer 10: I think it would be helpful to add a few words to explain why the gastronomy theme is used, as it may not be immediately obvious to a new reader of the paper. E.g.: 

```suggestion
using a gastronomy theme to help users quickly understand and navigate the website. "Cooking Tutorials" refers to tutorials that teach
```

provide a good entry point after the tutorials; then the "Advanced Recipes"

> that are more elaborate and advanced analysis examples, and last the "Regional Specialties"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
that are more elaborate and demonstrate advanced analysis techniques, and lastly the "Regional Specialties"
```

we mean self-contained notebooks showing how to perform concrete diagnostics
and analyses on ocean and sea-ice datasets. First come the "Easy Recipes" that

> provide a good entry point after the tutorials; then the "Advanced Recipes"

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
provide a good starting point after the tutorials; then the "Advanced Recipes"
```
This is such a nitpick I feel silly bringing it up, but entry points mean something specific and different in software - starting point might be better here.

(Feel free to dismiss this without comment - like I said, extremely nitpicky).

Other than that, this all looks great!

Reviewer 15: I just realised this is JOSE, not JOSS - this comment is even more irrelevant with that in mind TBH.

that are more elaborate and demonstrate advanced analysis techniques, and lastly the "Regional Specialties"
contains recipes for regional model configurations [@barnes2024regionalmom6].
Together these sections present the documentation as a browsable collection of

> lessons and recipes gathered into a single cookbook.

Reviewer 10: I think it would be worth mentioning that the concept of "Cookbook" for computational workflows is not unique - COSIMA is just one example of using this terminology. I suggest a potential sentence to add at the end of this paragraph where we'd link to a couple other examples. There are likely some better examples out there - these are just some I'm aware of!

```suggestion
lessons and recipes gathered into a single cookbook. The COSIMA Cookbook is one of several examples of using a gastronomy theme for computational workflows, for example [Project Pythia Cookbooks](https://cookbooks.projectpythia.org) for the general geoscience community and the [FAIR Cookbook](https://faircookbook.elixir-europe.org/content/home.html) for working with life science data.
```

Reviewer 11: Not sure of the timing of this (did they copy us?!) but NEMO has one too:
https://github.com/NOC-MSM/nemo_cookbook

I only just learnt about that but this has been around for ageees:
https://github.com/meom-group/CDFTOOLS

It was a great idea but I always found it a bit clunky to use being in the UK and it being a French thing/in Fortran.

Reviewer 11: This wouldn't exist without this example to follow I think:
https://github.com/ACCESS-Community-Hub/atmosphere-cookbook

Reviewer 14: My original motivation for the COSIMA cookbook was the 'gallery' page you see in a many visualization libraries, cookbook being a nice alliteration with COSIMA.  

If you are willing to reference other projects that operate in a similar space, [Project Pythia](https://projectpythia.org/) uses a similar naming convention for their [Cookbooks](https://cookbooks.projectpythia.org/).  (Shameless plug: I am one of the co-PIs on Project Pythia, https://zenodo.org/records/8184298)

Pedagogy and instructional structure are central to the project. The recipes provide the starting point for more elaborate analyses.
"Cooking Tutorials" introduces generic skills such as loading model output,
working with labelled arrays, plotting, and interacting with shared data catalogues.
These tutorials lead into domain-focused recipes giving learners an incremental path
from first contact with the data ecosystem to adaptation of full workflows for
their own science questions.

Within this structure, the tutorials leverage and demonstrate open source tools for
scientific analysis of large data. This includes examples of loading model output

> through Intake-based catalogues [@intake], using xarray [@hoyer2017xarray]

Reviewer 10: Pretty sure Xarray should be capitalized ([see Xarray docs here](https://xarray.dev))... (happy to be proven wrong if others disagree!)

```suggestion
through Intake-based catalogues [@intake], using Xarray [@hoyer2017xarray]
```

and Dask [@rocklin2015dask; @dask] to process very large multi-dimensional datasets

> in parallel. The recipe collection includes a Lagrangian particle-tracking workflow

Reviewer 11: Not sure if it's useful for a reader to be able to "discover" the recipes from reading this? If so, could we link to them in the article or name them?

[Related to this issue however](https://github.com/COSIMA/cosima-recipes/pull/657/changes#r3346407788)

Author: I wanna minimise links because we rename a recipe or a directory and links break?
I think if somebody opens the website and peruses for 2 minutes they will find it, no?
We even have a "Search" functionality on the website.

Author: I rephrased the paragraph here so that it doesn't mention a specific recipe.

The Cookbook grew from a practical need inside the COSIMA community: the tools
used to analyse modern ocean model output are powerful, but the gap between
package-level documentation and a reproducible end-to-end workflow remains
large. Users need to understand not only Python and Jupyter
[@kluyver2016jupyter], but also how to navigate high-dimensional model output,
shared high-performance computing environments, and domain-specific analysis

> conventions. The Cookbook addresses that gap by packaging reusable workflows in

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
conventions. The Cookbook addresses this gap by packaging reusable workflows in
```

large. Users need to understand not only Python and Jupyter

> [@kluyver2016jupyter], but also how to navigate high-dimensional model output,

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
[@kluyver2016jupyter], but also how to navigate high-dimensional and often very large model output,
```

shared high-performance computing environments, and domain-specific analysis
conventions. The Cookbook addresses this gap by packaging reusable workflows in
the same medium in which users actually work.

# Statement of Need

> Ocean and climate model analysis has a steep entry cost. New users must learn

Reviewer 11: "Ocean and climate model analysis"
Related to my title suggestion.

Author: ```suggestion
Analysing or configuring climate models has a steep entry cost. New users must learn
```

how to find datasets, load them efficiently, interpret metadata, operate on
multi-dimensional arrays, and produce scientifically meaningful diagnostics.

> General-purpose libraries such as xarray [@hoyer2017xarray] provide the

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
General-purpose libraries such as Xarray [@hoyer2017xarray] provide the
```

That gap is not only pedagogical; it directly affects how quickly model output
can be turned into science. For a beginner, becoming productive with a model
often requires substantial time just to understand the structure of the output,
the relevant conventions, and the computational environment in which analysis is
expected to run. There is also substantial scientific labour embedded in many
common diagnostics. Some calculations, for example computing cross-contour transports,
require non-trivial development, understanding of model numerics, and validation before
they can be used confidently. If every new user or project had to reconstruct
those workflows independently, a large amount of effort would be repeatedly spent
on rebuilding analysis code rather than conducting research using the model output.

> The COSIMA Cookbook fills that need with a domain-specific, openly maintained

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The COSIMA Cookbook facilitates knowledge sharing and accelerates research with a domain-specific, openly maintained
```

those workflows independently, a large amount of effort would be repeatedly spent

> on rebuilding analysis code rather than conducting research using the model output.

Reviewer 6: not convinced that "using the model output" is adding much here; could just be deleted

Author: it's been rephrased

> The COSIMA Cookbook facilitates knowledge sharing and accelerates research with

Reviewer 13: Maybe _knowledge sharing_ is a bit broad here? Would something like _the sharing of analysis methods and workflows_ be a bit more accurate ?

Reviewer 13: actually "workflow" appears quite frequently in this paragraph already

Author: I see your point
but just to avoid using workflow heaps, let's leave "knowledge sharing" for now and when I will read the manuscript from top to bottom I might think of a compelling alternative

a domain-specific, openly maintained collection of computational lessons and examples.
Its contribution is not a new analysis library; rather, it is a reusable scientific

> and educational resource that exposes complete, well-documented workflows in the same

Reviewer 11: Nice paragraph!

"well-documented" is such an important point in this paragraph!

For me, one of the key important values of this kind of resource is that it makes sophisticated analysis accessible to everyone. Previously, you might have needed to have the right group/interactions/supervisor etc but now you can run it on your own data and learn how a fancy metric works as long as you have a project and access to ARE.

notebook format in which many researchers actually explore data and communicate methods.
By choosing notebooks instead of packaging these examples only as a software
library, the project makes intermediate reasoning, methodological choices, and
practical execution details visible to learners while still giving more
experienced users analysis patterns they can adapt directly for research. This
aligns well with JOSE's emphasis on open educational resources that enable
computational learning through authentic practice.

Several design decisions make the Cookbook particularly useful for adoption by
other groups. First, each notebook is intended to be self-contained and
well-documented, so learners can read, run, and modify a complete workflow
without reconstructing missing context from scattered notes. Second, the

> repository distinguishes tutorials from recipes. Tutorials teach transferable

Reviewer 6: "Second, the repository distinguishes tutorials from recipes." — when I first read this sentence, I thought "hang on, that needs to be explained earlier on". I think it might be in the initial cookbook introduction paragraph, but I missed it on the first pass because of the foregrounding of cooking terms. If you're okay with my suggested rephrase there, then ignore this comment, otherwise I think the purpose and distinguishing features of recipes & tutorials should be made clearer somehow

Author: I believe now there is a mention of the categorisation earlier on

skills, while recipes demonstrate how those skills combine in realistic
analysis tasks. Third, the project includes contributor guidance and notebook
review conventions that encourage new analyses to be written in a reusable and
pedagogically clear style. A caveat is that some recipes use high-resolution
model output with datasets of order terabytes, so the underlying data are not
always practical to distribute or mirror in full. However, beyond the initial
data-loading step, which usually occurs early in each recipe, the analysis
workflows are generally applicable to most operational ocean--sea ice model

> outputs that can be loaded with xarray [@hoyer2017xarray].

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
outputs that can be loaded with Xarray [@hoyer2017xarray].
```

> Thus, the structure is valuable beyond the immediate COSIMA context. Many research

Reviewer 11: "the structure" being what is used in the repo (tutorials, cookbooks etc?)

Author: I rephrased to link with previous paragraph; the text now reads:

> Thus, the design renders the Cookbook valuable beyond...

communities maintain model output on shared infrastructure and face the same
challenge: turning expert tacit knowledge into examples that newcomers can
adapt. The Cookbook offers a model for how a scientific collaboration can

> capture that knowledge in version-controlled notebooks, publish it as a living

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
capture that knowledge in version-controlled notebooks, publish it as a living open
```

> resource, and continuously improve it through community contribution.

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
resource online, and continuously improve it through community contribution.
```

Reviewer 16: Was just thinking of adding a note that the recipes have already been used by other communities. Some in the US have copied parts of recipes and adapted them for use in CESM. So the recipes, by nature of being open-source, have already been very helpful for others.

Reviewer 17: [cf-xarray](https://github.com/xarray-contrib/cf-xarray) links to the [COSIMA Model Agnostic Analysis recipe](https://cosima-recipes.readthedocs.io/en/latest/01-Cooking-Lessons-101/02-Advanced/Model_Agnostic_Analysis.html) in their [documentation](https://cf-xarray.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

Is that worth mentioning?

# Educational Design and Experience of Use

The learning experience is organised as a progression. The documentation points
new users first to introductory lessons, including material on loading,
slicing, and visualising model output. Learners then move to more advanced
tutorials and finally to recipe notebooks that address concrete scientific
questions. The categories of "easy" and "advanced" recipes provide
a lightweight pedagogical cue about expected complexity and scope, with

> "regional specialties" specifically covering recipes for regional model configurations

Reviewer 6: Is this "recipes to do analysis on regional model configurations"? In which case I'm not clear on why the regional configs need their own recipes, and why these aren't the same thing as the global model grids. 
Or is it "recipes to set up regional model configurations"? In which case I think that deserves more clarity. Perhaps "specifically covering recipes to configure a regional model"?

Author: I see your point!

Currently the "Regional Specialties" only contain a recipe that helps to configure a regional ocean model. But the aspiration will be that the category will include other things perhaps more relevant to analysis of regional model, for example: https://github.com/COSIMA/cosima-recipes/pull/523

[@barnes2024regionalmom6].

> The intended mode of use is also explicit. The repository is designed around

Reviewer 10: I would be more explicit that these recipes/tutorials will only run (as is) on NCI.

I think "designed around" wasn't clear enough to me while reading that these are specifically for use on NCI.

```suggestion
The intended mode of use is also explicit. The tutorials and recipes showcase Jupyter-based analysis that can be run directly on Australia's National Computational Infrastructure,
```

Also, since JupyterLab is mentioned later in this sentence, we could also remove mention of that here.

> Jupyter-based analysis on the Australian National Computational Infrastructure,

Reviewer 10: Remove if you accept my previous suggested edit

```suggestion
```

with guidance on running notebooks through ARE/JupyterLab sessions and on
accessing shared data holdings. This makes the Cookbook more than a static
collection of examples: it is operational documentation for a real analysis
environment. At the same time, the notebooks demonstrate broadly transferable

> patterns for working with labelled geophysical data, so individual lessons can

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
workflows for working with labelled geophysical data, so individual lessons can
```

> be reused or adapted outside that environment.

Reviewer 10: Trying to use clearer language here

```suggestion
be reused or adapted for specific research questions or for use on other computational platforms.
```

The project also supports community authorship. Contributors are encouraged to

> submit new notebooks through pull requests, document their methods clearly, and

Reviewer 11: Can we be explicit that contributors then benefit from being listed on the citation? I think that's important for ECRs in particular.

Reviewer 6: I'm not convinced it's relevant to the community benefit of the paper. An unfortunate truth in current metrics evaluation of scientists, but the point of the cookbook is not that ppl get citations.

Author: True, I agree @jemmajeffree .

But to touch a bit on @chrisb13 we mention that the archive has a doi (which implies it's citable). It's implicitly there, not explicit. I'm leaning towards that it's a bit tangential to the community point being made here so I'm thinking we leave this as is.

> showcases best practices to the broader oceanographic community and enabled rapid

Reviewer 4: We want the present perfect tense here because it is _still_ happening. 
```suggestion
showcases best practices to the broader oceanographic community and has enabled rapid
```

community adoption of the ACCESS ocean and sea-ice model configurations internationally,
facilitating to date well over [100 peer-reviewed papers](https://scholar.google.com/citations?hl=en&user=inVqu_4AAAAJ) and scores of PhD projects.

# Author Order

The first two authors contributed equally; authors from the third position
onward are listed alphabetically by surname.

> # Acknowledgements

Reviewer 4: Is there a reason we aren't using any of the suggested acknowledgment text from Cosima.org? https://cosima.org.au/index.php/get-involved/

Author: The content is the same, no?

Author: Let me incorporate the suggested acknowledgment.

> community adoption of the ACCESS ocean and sea-ice model configurations internationally,

Reviewer 11: "The easy access to data and analysis provided by the COSIMA Cookbook
showcases best practices to the broader oceanographic community and has enabled rapid
community adoption of the ACCESS ocean and sea-ice model configurations internationally, facilitating to date well over [100 peer-reviewed papers](https://scholar.google.com/citations?hl=en&user=inVqu_4AAAAJ) and more than 20 PhD projects to completion with several
other underway."

This kind of statement could also be included earlier -- [see comment here](https://github.com/COSIMA/cosima-recipes/pull/657/changes#r3478052771).

Author: I think the comment you refer has been disappeared, probably because it was attached to some text that was heavily rephrased? Can you elaborate @chrisb13?

Reviewer 11: Oh yeah, I've seen this when GitHub "eats" comments. 

As I can't see it either I can't be 100% sure but I think it was the suggestion that a little more motivation/suggestion of the project's impact at the start of the doc would entice a reader to keep reading. I'm just thinking of two or so sentences at the end of the first paragraph in the Summary. I think a few others also made similar comments? (I do apologise but I somehow missed this [very relevant discussion](https://github.com/COSIMA/cosima-recipes/pull/657/changes/5bca5947fe884340ace3c12fd973577550d0e345..eb744444e3292c7b89e7c2b5c1d545eddb73b680#r3346562646) on my last read).

> probably because it was attached to some text that was heavily rephrased

I've just had a look at the pdf (caveat the workflow seems to have paused at the moment) and it looks like there are still similar paragraphs between paragraph 1 and 2 in the "Summary" section so the suggestion I made hasn't been addressed.

Author: https://github.com/COSIMA/cosima-recipes/pull/657/commits/334511da7d61730d7a1038c6b6f5a385aa99fb6f reduces duplication between paragraphs 1 and 2

> The first two authors contributed equally; authors from the third position

Reviewer 11: I suppose this is related to this paper (not the whole project). Is it worth being clear on that?

    index: 4
  - name: Bureau of Meteorology, Australia
    index: 5
  - name: California Institute of Technology, USA
    index: 6
  - name: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Australia
    index: 7
  - name: GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, Germany
    index: 8
  - name: IFREMER - French Institute for Ocean Science, France
    index: 9
  - name: Monash University, Australia
    index: 10
  - name: Princeton University, USA
    index: 11
  - name: British Antarctic Survey, UK
    index: 12
  - name: University of Melbourne, Australia
    index: 13
  - name: University of New South Wales Sydney, Australia
    index: 14
  - name: University of Southampton, UK
    index: 15
  - name: University of Tasmania, Australia
    index: 16
date: 26 May 2026
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

The COSIMA Cookbook is an open computational learning module for analysing
ocean and sea-ice model output in Jupyter notebooks. It has been developed by
the Consortium for Ocean--Sea Ice Modelling in Australia (COSIMA; <https://cosima.org.au>)
as a community resource for researchers, students, and practitioners working

> with large gridded datasets, especially output from the ACCESS ocean--sea ice

Reviewer 18: "with large gridded datasets" -- this feels like an overreach. There are so many peculiarities about ACCESS hard-coded into the recipes, from the z-star co-ordinate, to variable names, to grid type -- that stating something general like this feels like a stretch.

Author: it's true...

the use of cf-xarray was an attempt to generalise the recipes for non-specific MOM5 variable namers... but alas we decided to drop it

let's relax the statement here; I agree

Author: OK, although you are making valid points, I think that as a 3rd sentence of the paper it's fair to state "gridded datasets" and not get into nitty gritty of what grid etc. Yes, it's not the most generic way of dealing with grids, true...

The COSIMA Cookbook is an open educational resource for analysing
ocean and sea-ice model output in Jupyter notebooks [@kluyver2016jupyter].
It has been developed by the Consortium for Ocean--Sea Ice Modelling in Australia
(COSIMA; <https://cosima.org.au>) as a community resource for researchers,
students, and practitioners working with large gridded datasets, especially output
from the ACCESS ocean--sea ice model configurations [e.g. @kiss2020accessom2].
The Cookbook is developed openly in a GitHub repository, with all content exposed
through a documentation site built with Sphinx [@sphinx]; see \autoref{fig:website}. Tagged versions of the repository
are uploaded to a citable archived release [@cosimaCookbook].

![The COSIMA Cookbook documentation website, showing the browsable Sphinx-based
landing page used to navigate tutorials and recipes. The website
lives at <https://cosima-recipes.readthedocs.io>. \label{fig:website}](website.png)

The COSIMA Cookbook is deliberately organized using a gastronomy theme to help users
quickly understand and navigate the website. "Cooking Tutorials" refers to
tutorials that teach generic, transferable techniques for handling ocean--sea ice

> model output. These tutorials give the users the basis for understanding the analysis

Reviewer 2: users the foundations?

> examples the follow. Then comes the main part of any cookbook -- its recipes.

Reviewer 2: examples that follow?

aligns well with JOSE's emphasis on open educational resources that enable
computational learning through authentic practice.

Several design decisions have made the Cookbook particularly useful for adoption by
other groups. First, each notebook is intended to be self-contained and
well-documented, so learners can read, run, and modify a complete workflow
without reconstructing missing context from scattered notes. Second, the
repository distinguishes tutorials from recipes. Tutorials teach transferable
skills, while recipes demonstrate how those skills combine in realistic
analysis tasks. Third, the project includes contributor guidance and notebook
review conventions that encourage new analyses to be written in a reusable and
pedagogically clear style. A caveat is that most recipes use high-resolution
model output with datasets of order terabytes, so the underlying data are not
always practical to distribute or mirror in full. However, beyond the data-loading step,
which usually early on in each recipe, the analysis workflows are generally
applicable to most operational ocean--sea ice model outputs that can be
loaded with Xarray [@hoyer2017xarray].

> Thus, the design renders the Cookbook valuable beyond the immediate the COSIMA context.

Reviewer 2: the immediate COSIMA context.

    index: 16
  - name: University of Tasmania, Australia
    index: 17
date: 1 July 2026
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

The COSIMA Cookbook is an open educational resource for analysing
ocean and sea-ice model output in Jupyter notebooks [@kluyver2016jupyter].
It has been developed by the Consortium for Ocean--Sea Ice Modelling in Australia
(COSIMA; <https://cosima.org.au>) as a community resource for researchers,
students, and practitioners working with large gridded datasets, especially output
from the ACCESS ocean--sea ice model configurations [e.g. @kiss2020accessom2].
The Cookbook is developed openly in a GitHub repository and it combines Python Jupyter
notebooks of introductory tutorials together with worked analysis examples.
All tutorials and examples are exposed through a browsable documentation site
built with Sphinx, a documentation generator for Python
projects [@sphinx]; see \autoref{fig:website}. Tagged versions of the repository
are uploaded to a citable archived release [@cosimaCookbook].

![The COSIMA Cookbook documentation website, showing the browsable Sphinx-based
landing page used to navigate tutorials and recipes. The website

> lives at <https://cosima-recipes.readthedocs.io>. \label{fig:website}](website.png)

Reviewer 11: Is it worth mentioning somewhere that the codebase is _not_ at:
https://github.com/coSIMA/cosima-cookbook

Sorry if I missed it if it is mentioned but I think it's a likely gotcha for someone to get confused given that the article says things like "the cosima cookbook..."
